Structuring System Data Requirements
an Entity-Delationship (E-R) Diagram
ERD
Ministry of Higher Education & Scientific Research Erbil Polytechnic University
Technical College of Computer and Informatics Engineering
Information System Engineering Dept.
3 rd Stage ISD
The Lecturer :
Assist. Lect. Mrs. Najat Yohana DenhaISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 1 of 36 --

Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 2
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 2 of 36 --

Learning Objectives
❑ In last previous tow lectures we learned how to model and analyze the flow of data (data in
motion) between manual or automated steps and how to show data stores (data at rest) in a
data-flow diagram.
❑ Data-flow diagrams show how, where, and when data are used or changed in an information
system, but they do not show the definition, structure, and relationships within the data.
❑ Data modeling, the subject of this Lecture , develops this missing, and crucial, piece of the
description of an information system.
❑ Explain the role of conceptual data modeling in the overall analysis and design of an
information system.
❑ Briefly define each of the following key data modeling terms:
➢ An Entity, Entity Type & Entity Instances, attribute,
➢ Candidate Keys and Identifiers
➢ multivalued attribute, Optional attribute, .. ,etc.
➢ relationship, degree, Distinguish between unary, binary, and ternary relationships and give
an example for each one .
❑ Cardinality.
❑ Introduce to Entity-Relationship (E-R) Modeling
❑ Draw an entity-relationship (E-R) diagram to represent common business situations.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 3
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 3 of 36 --

Conceptual Data Modeling
• Conceptual data modeling is only one kind of data modeling and database design activity done
throughout the systems development process. Figure 7-2 shows the different kinds of data modeling and
database design that occur during the systems development life cycle.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 4
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 4 of 36 --

Conceptual data model
❑ Conceptual data model : A detailed model that shows the overall
structure of organizational data while being independent of any database
management system or other implementation considerations.
❑ The conceptual data-modeling methods we discuss in this Lecture are
suitable for various tasks in the planning and analysis phases. These
phases of the SDLC address issues of system scope, general
requirements, and content.
❑ Most organizations today do conceptual data modeling using entity-
relationship modeling, which uses a special notation of rectangles,
diamonds, and lines to represent as much meaning about data as possible.
❑ Thus, the primary deliverable from the conceptual data-modeling step
within the analysis phase is an entity-relationship (E-R) diagram.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 5
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 5 of 36 --

The Conceptual Data Modeling Process
1) Develop a data model for the current
system.
2) Develop a new conceptual data model that
includes all requirements of the new
system.
3) In the design stage, the conceptual data
model is translated into a physical design.
4) Project repository links all design and data
modeling steps performed during SDLC.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 6
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 6 of 36 --

Deliverables and Outcome
◼ Primary deliverable is an entity-relationship (E-R) diagram or class diagram.
◼ As many as 4 E-R or class diagrams are produced and analyzed:
 E-R diagram that covers data needed in the project’s application.
 E-R diagram for the application being replaced.
 E-R diagram for the whole database from which the new application’s data are
extracted.
 E-R diagram for the whole database from which data for the application system
being replaced is drawn.
◼ Second deliverable is a set of entries about data objects to be
stored in repository or project dictionary.
 Repository links data, process, and logic models of an information system.
 Data elements included in the DFD must appear in the data model and vice versa.
 Each data store in a process model must relate to business objects represented in
the data model.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 7
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 7 of 36 --

Introduction to Entity-Relationship (E-R) Modeling
◼ Entity-Relationship data model (E-R model):
a detailed, logical representation of the entities,
associations and data elements for an organization or
business area.
◼ Entity-relationship diagram (E-R diagram):
a graphical representation of an E-R model.
◼ The E-R model is expressed in terms of:
 Data entities in the business environment.
 Relationships or associations among those entities.
 Attributes or properties of both the entities and their
relationships.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 8
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 8 of 36 --

A sample E-R diagram appears in Figure 7-3A.This figure shows the major categories of data
(rectangles in the diagram) and the business relationships between them (lines connecting rectangles).
For example :- it describes that, for the business represented, a SUPPLIER sometimes supplies
ITEMs to the company, and an ITEM is always supplied by one to four SUPPLIERS. The fact that a supplier only
sometimes supplies items implies that the business wants to keep track of some suppliers without designating what
they can supply. This diagram includes two names on each line, giving you explicit language to read a relationship
in each direction. For simplicity, we will not typically include two names on lines in E-R diagrams in this lecture;
however, many organizations use this standard.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 9
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 9 of 36 --

Entity
• Entity: a person, place, object, event or concept in the user environment
about which data is to be maintained.
• An entity has its own identity, which distinguishes it from every other entity.
• Some examples of entities follow:
Person: EMPLOYEE, STUDENT, PATIENT
Place: STATE, REGION, COUNTRY, BRANCH
Object: MACHINE, BUILDING, AUTOMOBILE, PRODUCT
Event: SALE, REGISTRATION, RENEWAL
Concept: ACCOUNT, COURSE, WORK CENTER
• Note :-
• Each entity in the diagram represent a table in the DataBase. ,so, look to
the entity as a table of rows and columns.
• We can say entity means table in DB.
•
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 10
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 10 of 36 --

An Entity Type
◼ An entity type is a collection of entities that share common properties or
characteristics. Each entity type in an E-R model is given a name. Because the
name represents a set of entities, it is singular.
◼ An entity type name should be:
	
A singular noun;
	
Descriptive and specific to the organization;
	
Concise.
◼ Also, because an entity is an object, we use a simple noun to name an entity type.
We use capital letters in naming an entity type,
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 11
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 11 of 36 --

◼ in an E-R diagram, the name is placed inside a rectangle representing the entity, for
example:STUDENT.
– The following diagram shows the representation for
a STUDENT entity type using E-R notation:
– The equivalent representation using Microsoft Visio is the following :
• In the Visio notation, the primary key is listed immediately below the entity name with the notation PK, and the
primary key is underlined.
• All required attributes (that is, an instance of STUDENT must
have values for Student_ID and Name) are in bold.
•
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 12
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 12 of 36 --

Types of Entity and there shapes
◼ Strong and weak entities
• A
strong entity has a primary key,
meaning that it can be uniquely identified
by its attributes alone.
• A
weak entity is an entity that can't be
uniquely identified by its attributes alone.
It is existence-dependent on its parent
entity. It must use a foreign key in
conjunction with its attributes to create a
primary key. Typically, the foreign key is
the primary key of a strong entity that the
weak entity is related to.
◼ The relationship between two strong
entities is simply called a
relationship.
◼ The relationship between a strong entity
and a weak entity is called a
strong
relationship.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 13
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 13 of 36 --

◼ You need to recognize an important distinction between entity types and entity instances.
◼ An entity instance (or instance) is a single occurrence of an entity type. An entity type is described just once
in a data model, whereas many instances of that entity type may be represented by data stored in the
database. For example, most organizations have one EMPLOYEE entity type, but hundreds (or even
thousands) of instances of this entity type may be stored in the database.
◼ A common mistake made in learning to draw E-R diagrams, especially if you already know how to do data-
flow diagramming, is to confuse data entities with sources/sinks, system outputs, or system users, and to
confuse relationships with data flows.
 A simple rule to avoid such confusion is that a true data entity will have many possible instances, each
with a distinguishing characteristic, as well as one or more other descriptive pieces of data.
◼ Consider the following entity types that might be associated with a church expense system:
◼ In this situation, the church treasurer manages accounts and records expense transactions against each
account. However, do we need to keep track of data about the treasurer and her supervision of accounts as
part of this accounting system?
◼ The treasurer is the person entering data about accounts and expenses and making inquiries about account
balances and expense transactions by category. Because the system includes only one treasurer,
TREASURER data do not need to be kept. On the other hand, if each account has an account manager (e.g.,
a church committee chair) who is responsible for assigned accounts, then we may wish to have a
ACCOUNT MANAGER entity type, with pertinent attributes as well as relationships to other entity types.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 14
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 14 of 36 --

Attributes
◼ Each entity type has a set of attributes associated with it.
◼ An attribute is a property or characteristic of an entity that is of interest to the organization.
◼ An attribute name is a
noun and should be
unique.
◼ Attributes give us additional information about the entity. It describes the property of an entity.
In the ER model, we represent the Attributes as an Eclipse. For example, If Employee is an
entity, employee id, contact number, name, date of joining, etc can be the attributes of an
employee.
◼ An attribute provides the characteristics of the entity. In other words, an attribute describes the
property of an entity. Each entity consists of one or more attributes.
◼ Note :- relationships may also have attributes.
◼ Following are some typical entity types
and associated attributes:
• STUDENT: Student_ID, Student_Name, Address, Phone_Number
• AUTOMOBILE: Vehicle_ID, Color, Weight, Horsepower
• EMPLOYEE: Employee_ID, Employee_Name, Address, Skill
◼ We use nouns with an initial capital letter followed by lowercase letters in naming an attribute.
In E-R diagrams, we represent an attribute by placing its name inside the rectangle that
represents the associated entity.
◼ In many E-R drawing tools, such as Microsoft Visio, attributes are listed within the entity
rectangle under the entity name.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 15
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 15 of 36 --

Database Attributes Types
There are many different types of attributes in DBMS.
1. Simple Attributes
 Simple Attributes are independent attributes that cannot be classified further. In
other words, it is also known as atomic attributes.
 For example, a Student is an entity that consists of attributes Roll No, Age, Class.
Here, we cannot divide the Roll no attribute into sub-attributes. Therefore, if we
cannot divide the attribute further then it is a Simple Attribute.
2. Composite Attribute
 When it is possible to divide the attributes into different components then that
attribute is called a Composite Attribute. We divide Composite Attribute into sub-
parts that form simple attributes.
 an attribute that has meaningful component parts
 For example, If Name is an attribute for Student entity. We can divide the Name
attribute into first name, middle name, last name attributes. These sub-attributes
that are classified from the composite Attribute works as Simple Attributes.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 16
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 16 of 36 --

3. Single Valued Attributes
 Attributes stores values that are used to describe the entity. The attributes which
are able to store only one value are known as Single Valued Attributes. These
attributes cannot store more than one value.
 For example, The attributes of an Employee entity are Employee id, DOB, Gender.
An employee has only one employee id which is unique and it also has a single date
of birth. So these attributes can store only one value in it. Therefore, it is known as
Single Valued Attributes.
4. Multi-Valued Attributes
4. The attributes which are able to store more than one value are known as Multi-
Valued Attributes.(i.e. an attribute that may take on more than one value for each
entity instance).
❑ For example, let’s assume Email id and Contact No are the attributes of the
Employee entity. An employee can provide more than one email id and contact no.
Therefore multiple values can be stored in Multi-Valued Attributes.
5. Derived Attributes
 an attribute whose value can be computed from related attribute
values.
 For example, We can calculate the age from the date of birth value. Therefore Age
attribute can be derived from the DOB attribute.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 17
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 17 of 36 --

Other Attribute Types
◼ Repeating group attribute: a set or two or more multivalued attributes that
are logically related.
◼ Required attribute: an attribute that must have a value for every entity
instance.
◼ Optional attribute: an attribute that may not have a value for every entity
instance.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 18
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 18 of 36 --

 .
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 19
Primary Key (PK)
A primary key is used to ensure data in the specific column is unique. It is a column cannot have
NULL values. It is either an existing table column or a column that is specifically generated by the
database according to a defined sequence.Example: - customer_ID is a PK in Customer table. In next
page example.also for relation STUDENT STUD_NO can be chosen as the primary key .
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 19 of 36 --

Foreign key ( FK) :- is just like PK ,but, it is located in a foreign place.
◼ Foreign key don’t have to be unique.(i.e. they can be repeated in a table).
◼ Thay can be multiple foreign keys in one entity.
◼ Foreign Key: - is a column or group of columns in a relational database table that provides a link
between data in two tables. It is a column (or columns) that references a column (most often the
primary key) of another table. Example: STUD_NO in STUDENT_COURSE is a foreign key to STUD_NO in
STUDENT relation. Customer_ID and Product_ID are FK in Order table .
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 20
PK
FK
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 20 of 36 --

Relationships
◼ A relationship is an association between
the instances of one or more entity types
that are of interest to the organization.
◼ Relationships are the glue that hold
together the various components of an E-R
model, relationships are labeled with verb
phrases. A relationship name is a
verb
phrase and
avoid vague names.
◼ Types:-
◼ For example, a training department in a company
is interested in tracking which training courses
each of its employees has completed. This
information leads to a relationship (called
Completes) between the EMPLOYEE and
COURSE entity types that we diagram as follows:
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 21
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 21 of 36 --

Degree
◼ Degree: the number of entity types that participate in a relationship.
 Unary relationship: a relationship between the instances of one entity type.
◼ Also called a
recursive relationship.
 Binary relationship: a relationship between instances of two entity types.
◼ This is the most common type of relationship encountered in data
modeling.
 Ternary relationship: a simultaneous relationship among instances of three
entity types.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 22
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 22 of 36 --

Degree
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 23
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 23 of 36 --

Cardinalities
◼ Cardinality: the number of instances of entity B that can (or
must) be associated with each instance of entity A.(i.e.
Cardinality specifies how many instances of an entity relate
to one instance of another entity.)
◼ Minimum Cardinality
◼ The minimum number of instances of entity B that
may be associated with each instance of entity A.
◼ Maximum Cardinality
◼ The maximum number of instances of entity B that
may be associated with each instance of entity A.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 24
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 24 of 36 --

Minimum & Maximum cardinality
❑ Relationships are named and
classified by
their cardinality (i.e. number of
elements of the set).
❑ Symbols which appears closes to the
entity is Maximum cardinality and
the other one is Minimum
cardinality.
❑ Entity relation, shows end of
the relationship line as follows:
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 25
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 25 of 36 --

Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 26
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 26 of 36 --

Ordinality
◼ Ordinality is also closely linked to cardinality. While cardinality
specifies the occurrences of a relationship, ordinality describes the
relationship as either mandatory or optional.
◼ Ordinality Specifies whether an instance must exist (i.e. mandatory )
or an instance can be absent (i.e. optional) in the relationship.
.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 28
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 27 of 36 --

Crow’s Foot notation
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 29
- There are many different ways to represent the relationships between entities.
- For this class, please use crow’s foot notation.
- Crow’s foot notation consists of a pair of icons at each end of a line.
-The “outer” icon represents the “maximum” value, and the “inner” icon represents
the “minimum” value:
-Example:-
- Thus indicates that a specific garden instance can have zero or more plant species
in it (because some gardens might be “brand new” and consist only of dirt). -
However, every instance of a plant species (for example, Digitalis Purpurea) is
associated with at least one garden (i.e. we don’t create a plant species in the database
unless there’s a garden instance that uses it).
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 28 of 36 --

Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 30
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 29 of 36 --

Tips for designing the diagram
1) Identify all the entities you need. Draw all of them in
the diagram.
2) Determine which entities have relationships with each
other, and connect them. (Not all entities will have
relationships. Some may have multiple relationships.)
3) Each entity should appear only once in the diagram.
4) Look over the relationships you've drawn. Are there
any redundant relationships?
Are there any that are unnecessary or missing?
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 31
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 30 of 36 --

Example
Data-flow diagrams show how, where, and when data are used or changed in an information
system, but they do not show the definition, structure, and relationships within the data.
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 32
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 31 of 36 --

Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 33
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 32 of 36 --

Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 34
The equivalent representation using Microsoft Visio notation
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 33 of 36 --

Shapes
Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 35
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 34 of 36 --

Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 36
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 35 of 36 --

Assist.Lect. Mrs. Najat Y. Danah 37
ISD - Assist. Lect. NAjat Yohana Danha

-- 36 of 36 --

