Part#1
The SystemsDevelopmentEnvironment
SDLC
Third Stage \ 6th Semester
InformationSystemsDesign (ISD)
Lect. :-
assist.Lectr. Mrs. Najat Yohana Danha
Ministry of Higher Education & Scientific Research
Erbil Polytechnic University
Technical College of Computer and Informatics Engineering
Information Systems Engineering Dep.
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 1 of 16 --

OutLine
1. Information Systems Analysis and Design\
2. Systems Analyst
3. Types of Information Systems
4. Systems Development Life Cycle (SDLC)
5. Alternative Approaches to Development :-
2
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 2 of 16 --

◼ Information Systems Analysis and Design
 Complex organizational process.
 Used to develop and maintain computer-based information systems.
 Used by a team of business and systems professionals.
◼ Application Software
 Computer software designed to support organizational functions or
processes.
◼ Systems Analyst
 Organizational role most responsible for analysis and design of
information systems.
❑ Systems Analyst Characteristics for Successful Requirements
Determination
 Impertinence
 Impartiality
 Relaxing constraints
 Attention to details
 Reframing
3
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 3 of 16 --

Types of Information Systems
Following Figure illustrates this conceptual classification of information systems applications. Information systems
are categorized this way to spotlight the major roles each plays in the operations and management of a business.
4
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 4 of 16 --

Types of Information Systems
• Conceptually, the applications of information systems that are implemented in
today’s business world can be classified in several different ways. For example,
several types of information systems can be classified as :-
A.Operations Information Systems :-
1. Transaction Processing Systems.
2. Process Control Systems
3. Enterprise Collaboration Systems
B. Management Information Systems:-
1. Management Information Systems(MIS).
2. Decision Support Systems(DSS).
3. Executive Information Systems(EIS).
C. Other Categories of Information Systems:-
1. Expert systems.
2. Knowledge management systems.
3. Strategic information systems.
4. Functional business systems.
5
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 5 of 16 --

C. Other Categories of Information Systems
1. Expert systems. Knowledge-based systems that provide expert advice
and act as expert consultants to users. Examples: credit application
advisor, process monitor, and diagnostic maintenance systems.
2. Knowledge management systems. Knowledge-based systems
that support the creation, organization, and dissemination of business
knowledge within the enterprise. Examples: intranet access to best
business practices, sales proposal strategies, and customer problem
resolution systems.
3. Strategic information systems. Support operations or
management processes that provide a firm with strategic products,
services, and capabilities for competitive advantage. Examples: online
stock trading, shipment tracking, and e-commerce Web systems.
4. Functional business systems. Support a variety of operational
and managerial applications of the basic business functions of a company.
Examples: information systems that support applications in accounting,
finance, marketing, operations management, and human resource
management.
6
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 6 of 16 --

Systems Development Life Cycle (SDLC)
◼ Traditional methodology used to develop, maintain,
and replace information systems.
◼ Phases in SDLC:-
 Planning
 Analysis
 Design
 Implementation
 Maintenance
7
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 7 of 16 --

Standard SDLC
8
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 8 of 16 --

◼ Planning – an organization’s total information system needs
are identified, analyzed, prioritized, and arranged.
◼ Analysis – system requirements are studied and structured.
◼ Design – a description of the recommended solution is
converted into logical and then physical system specifications.
◼ Logical design – all functional features of the system chosen for
development in analysis are described independently of any computer
platform.
◼ Physical design – the logical specifications of the system from logical
design are transformed into the technology-specific details from which
all programming and system construction can be accomplished.
◼ Implementation – the information system is coded, tested,
installed and supported in the organization.
◼ Maintenance – an information system is systematically
repaired and improved.
9
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 9 of 16 --

Products of the SDLC Phases
Maintenance
10
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 10 of 16 --

Alternative Approaches to Development :-
Prototyping, computer-aided software engineering (CASE) tools, joint
application design (JAD), rapid application development (RAD), participatory
design (PD), and the use of Agile Methodologies represent different
approaches that streamline and improve the systems analysis and design
process from different perspectives.
◼ The Waterfall model is the earliest SDLC approach that was used for software
development.
◼ Prototyping
◼ Computer-Aided Software Engineering (CASE) Tools
◼ Joint Application Design (JAD)
◼ Rapid Application Development (RAD)
◼ Agile Methodologies
◼ V-Model
◼ eXtreme Programming
◼ Object-Oriented Analysis and Design (OOAD)
11
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 11 of 16 --

Traditional Waterfall SDLC
The Waterfall Model was the first Process Model to be
introduced. It is also referred to as a linear-sequential life
cycle model. One phase begins when another completes,
little backtracking and looping
◼ System requirements
“locked in” after being
determined (can't change).
◼ Limited user involvement
(only in requirements phase).
◼ Too much focus on milestone
deadlines of SDLC phases to
the detriment of sound
development practices.
Problems with Waterfall
Approach
12
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 12 of 16 --

Joint Application Design (JAD)
◼ Structured process involving users,
analysts, and managers.
◼ Several-day intensive workgroup sessions.
◼ Purpose: to specify or review system
requirements.
17
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 13 of 16 --

Rapid Application Development
(RAD)
◼ Methodology to radically decrease
design and implementation time.
◼ Involves: extensive user involvement,
prototyping, JAD sessions, integrated
CASE tools, and code generators.
18
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 14 of 16 --

Rapid Application
Development (RAD) (Cont.)
19
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 15 of 16 --

23
ISD-Assist. Lect. Najat Yohana Danha

-- 16 of 16 --

